.\"
.\"     wrap -- text reformatter
.\"     wraprc.5 manual page
.\"
.\"     Copyright (C) 2013-2017  Paul J. Lucas
.\"
.\"     This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" define code-start macro
.de cS
.sp
.nf
.RS 5
.ft CW
..
.\" define code-end macro
.de cE
.ft 1
.RE
.fi
.if !'\\$1'0' .sp
..
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH \f3wraprc\fP 1 "February 18, 2018" "PJL TOOLS"
.SH NAME
wraprc \- text reformatter runtime configuration file
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B wraprc
file is used to configure
.BR wrap (1)
and
.BR wrapc (1).
The file is line-oriened with different line types:
.P
.PD 0
.IP "\(bu" 3
Blank lines (that are ignored).
.IP "\(bu" 3
Section lines.
.IP "\(bu" 3
Configuration lines.
.PD
.P
Additionally,
all leading and trailing whitespace characters
as well as all characters starting with
.B #
to the end of the line (which are comments)
are ignored.
.P
The file is broken down into sections
where each section is started by a line of the form:
.P
.RS 5
.RI [ section-name ]
.RE
.P
that is a left bracket,
a section name,
and a right bracket.
There must be no whitespace between the brackets.
.SS Aliases Section
The
.I "aliases section"
is started by a line:
.cS
[ALIASES]
.cE
An
.I alias
is a short-hand name
(composed of letters, digits, or any of the \f(CW+-.:_\fP characters)
for command-line options
that are frequently used together.
For example:
.cS
code = --block-chars=@ --markdown
.cE
creates an alias named
\f(CWcode\fP
for the options shown.
(Arguments need not be shell-escaped since no shell is involved.)
Once specified,
an alias can be requested via the
.B \-\-alias
or
.B \-a
option
to either
.B wrap
or
.BR wrapc .
For example:
.cS
wrap --alias code
.cE
would be the same as:
.cS
wrap --block-chars=@ --markdown
.cE
An option of the form
.RI \f(CW@\fP name
imports the options of the previously defined alias
.IR name .
For example:
.cS
c-like = @code --comment-chars=/*,//
.cE
would be the same as:
.cS
c-like = --block-chars=@ --markdown --comment-chars=/*,//
.cE
Note that some options don't make sense
in a configuration file
and are therefore forbidden there.
Those options are:
.B \-\-alias
.RB ( \-a ),
.B \-\-config
.RB ( \-c ),
.B \-\-no-config
.RB ( \-C ),
.B \-\-file
.RB ( \-f ),
.B \-\-file-name
.RB ( \-F ),
.B \-\-output
.RB ( \-o ),
and
.B \-\-version
.RB ( \-v ).
.SS Patterns Section
The
.I "patterns section"
is started by a line:
.cS
[PATTERNS]
.cE
A
.I pattern
is used to apply aliases automatially
when a file matching that pattern is wrapped
using the
.BR \-\-file ,
.BR \-f ,
.BR \-\-file-name ,
or
.B \-F
option.
For example:
.cS
*.[ch] = c-like
.cE
creates a pattern that matches all files ending in
\f(CW.[ch]\fP
(C source files)
and will apply the options specified by the previously defined
\f(CWc\fP
alias.
.P
If a file matches more than one pattern,
only the options of the alias corresponding to the first match are applied.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HOME
The user's home directory:
used to locate the default configuration file.
If unset,
the home directory is obtained from the password database entry
for the effective user.
If that fails,
no default configuration file is read.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.wraprc
The default configuration file.
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
.ft CW
[ALIASES]
code   = --block-chars=@ --markdown
c-like = @code --comment-chars=/*,//
markup = --eos-delimit --para-chars=,:;
man    = @markup --dot-ignore
script = @code --comment-chars=\\#

[PATTERNS]
*.[chly]   = c-like
*.[chly]pp = c-like
*.htm      = markup
*.html     = markup
*.java     = c-like
*.p[ly]    = script
*.sh       = script
*.[1-9]    = man
.ft 1
.fi
.SH AUTHOR
Paul J. Lucas
.RI < paul@lucasmail.org >
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR wrap (1),
.BR wrapc (1),
.BR fnmatch (3)
.\" vim:set et sw=2 ts=2:
